# Aging

1. Diet is king to slow down aging. The quality of your food is paramount. Vegetables, fruit, low mercury fish and lean milk products are important. Lean, clean meat (organic chicken, grass-fed beef, bison, venison) in moderation is also good. Apart from quality it is important to have a certain amount of calorie restriction, particularly with regard to sugar and starchy foods (noodles, rice, potatoes, pizza etc.). Too much sugar and starchy food intake is associated with premature aging. What diet you eat determines whether you are overweight, obese or normal weight. It is only the normal weight person who ages well. Others have too many inflammatory cytokines on board that age them prematurely. It goes without saying that junk foods and processed foods must be eliminated, if you want to reach a normal life expectancy: what to do to stop eating junk food.
2. Avoid toxins: too much alcohol, stop smoking. Each of these take about 10 years each from your life expectancy.
3. Regular exercise is what keeps your heart strong, your arteries free from fat deposits, called atheromatas. Regular exercise increases the healthy HDL cholesterol, which lets you live longer. It keeps your arteries open and your bones strong. Regular exercise also keeps your skeletal muscles and your heart muscle strong. Older people who do not exercise are the ones that fall, break bones and die prematurely.
4. Get enough sleep and relaxation. This restores your hormones overnight. Adults need 7 to 8 hours of sleep starting between 10 PM and 11 PM. When you got to bed late at night, you have disrupted your diurnal hormonal rhythm. This means you missed the human growth hormone peak between midnight and 3 AM, so you won’t have the energy you need for the following day despite your 8 hours sleep.

Effect of Circadian Rhythm on Metabolic Processes and the Regulation of Energy Balance What is less known is that your telomeres are shortened with less sleep or delayed sleep onset: Delayed sleep-onset and biological age: late sleep-onset is associated with shorter telomere length. The opposite is also true: enough sleep and relaxation elongate your telomeres, which means it slows down your aging process. Ray Schilling's answer to What can be the problem of sleeping late at night and waking up late in the morning?


Vitamin and mineral supplements can add 5 to 10 years of good life: Multivitamin use and telomere length in women. This telomere elongation adds about 8 or 9 years to your normal life expectancy. There are some vitamins and supplements that are more important: resveratrol , omega-3 fatty acids, vitamin C, vitamin E (particularly Tocotrienol), vitamin D3, zinc, magnesium: David Sinclair Supplements List Deep Dive - Updated 2021. More info on vitamins and minerals: Ray Schilling's answer to Are daily vitamins beneficial, or are you really just making expensive urine?
Hormone replacement when your own hormone production fails. When we age our hormone glands age as well and produce less hormones than we need. This causes characteristic symptoms, which bring people to see their physician. Blood tests can confirm hypothyroidism. When TSH is higher than 2.5, the person needs thyroid hormone replacement. With women in menopause and men in andropause bioidentical hormone replacement is necessary, if you want to continue to function well: bioidentical hormone replacement. You may gain up to 10 years in life expectancy doing this right away when you enter menopause as a woman or andropause as a man.
Growth hormone deficiency must be corrected: One of the hormones I was deficient in is human growth hormones (HGH). Dr. Hertoghe, an endocrinologist from Belgium said at various anti-aging conferences that HGH by itself prolongs life by about 15 to 20 years or more. I am injecting HGH regularly and measuring my IGF-1 level to monitor the right dosage of it. Ray Schilling's answer to How can ageing be delayed? What is pathophysiology and its latest research protocols? The reason I kept this separate from the other hormones is that HGH has its own force, separate from the other hormones. It needs to be supervised by a physician like the other hormones.
Fasting mimicking diet (FMD). Fasting for Longevity: 9 Questions for Dr. Valter D. Longo. When you consume only 500 to 600 calories daily for 5 days out of every month you are stimulating your telomeres (the caps on your chromosomes) to grow a little bit longer. Longer telomeres translate into longer life expectancy. But your stem cells anywhere in your body are also stimulated. Here is more information: fasting mimicking diet for 5 days every month.
Here is my answer to your question: “What are the best ways to slow down the aging process?” There are a number of steps you can take to allow you to slow down the aging process. Points 1 to 4 above are the basic steps anybody can take. A vitamin and supplement program can add 5.1% of telomere length, which translates into 5 to 10 years of life expectancy. I provided a link under point 5, which daily vitamins are beneficial.

Point 6, 7 and 8 are more sophisticated steps to slow down the aging process. This is based on many lectures I listened to over the years from the yearly Anti-Aging Medicine Conferences in Las Vegas at the Venetian Palace. Many of you may find this too complicated. It takes some reading and studying to understand the underlying principles. The fasting mimicking diet is somewhat easier to understand. It also elongates telomeres, which means that it slows down the aging process.
